Source: https://www.uscis.gov/working-in-the-united-states/important-information-about-working-legally-in-the-united-states

Important Information About Working Legally in the United States
You are likely eligible to apply for an employment authorization document (EAD) to legally work in the United States if:
1. You were recently paroled into the United States through the parole processes for nationals of Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela, or after receiving a CBP One App appointment and presenting at a Port of Entry; or
2. You have applied for asylum by filing Form I-589, Application for Asylum and for Withholding of Removal, and your asylum application has been pending for at least 150 days.

If you have not already started the EAD application process, you can begin by creating a USCIS account online (https://myaccount.uscis.gov/create-account) and filing Form-I-765, Application for Employment Authorization (https://www.uscis.gov/i-765). We will mail your EAD to the address you provided in your EAD application if your Form I-765 is approved. 

CREATE AN ACCOUNT AND FILE ONLINE
Submitting your EAD application online provides helpful instructions and tips from USCIS as you complete your form using the secure online filing system (https://myaccount.uscis.gov/create-account). The system also helps you avoid common mistakes, such as leaving critical parts of the application blank or forgetting to sign your name, check case status (https://egov.uscis.gov/), and upload evidence. Be sure to review our How to Create a USCIS Online Account (https://www.uscis.gov/file-online/how-to-create-a-uscis-online-account) video for more information. Filing an application online is easier than you think. If necessary, you can file a paper application for Form I-765 instead of filing online.

FILING FEES
If you have a pending Form I-589, there is no fee to file your initial Form I-765, but you may not file until 150 days after you submit your asylum application. You must submit the filing fee with a subsequent Form I-765 application.
For those individuals paroled into the U.S., there is also a filing fee. 
You can find the filing fee for Form I-765 by visiting our Fee Schedule (https://www.uscis.gov/g-1055) page. You may apply for a fee waiver (https://www.uscis.gov/forms/filing-fees/additional-information-on-filing-a-fee-waiver) if you are unable to pay the filing fee. 

APPLICATION DETAILS
Items you will need to provide as evidence for your Form I-765 include:
1. Either a copy of your stamped Form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record (front and back), a printout of your electronic Form I-94, a copy of your passport, or other travel document;
2. A copy of your last EAD (if applicable);
3. If you were not previously issued an EAD, a copy of a government-issued identity document; and
4. Form G-28 (if you are represented by an attorney or accredited representative).

If you need to retrieve a copy your Form I-94, you may do so online by visiting U.S. Customs and Border Patrol’s I-94 webpage.
If you apply for an EAD, USCIS will notify you of the decision in writing. If your application is approved, we will either mail your EAD to you or we may require you to visit your local USCIS office to pick it up. If your address has changed, you must update it. You may do so through your USCIS online account (https://myaccount.uscis.gov/create-account) if you filed your form online or through the appropriate option listed in our Change of Address (https://www.uscis.gov/addresschange) page.


