Muscle Activation in Therapeutic Exercises to Improve Trunk Stability
M. Johanne Vezina, MSc, Cheryl L. Hubley-Kozey, PhD

Objective: To evaluate the relative activation amplitudes from 3 abdominal and 2 trunk extensor muscle sites in healthy subjects performing the pelvic tilt, abdominal hollowing, and level 1 of the trunk stability test (TST level 1) exercises and to compare the activation amplitudes among muscle sites and exercises.

Design: Prospective comparative study.

Setting: Motion Analysis Research Center, Dalhousie University, Canada.

Participants: Twenty-four healthy men (mean age, 30 ±8.1yr[SD])without low back pain.

Interventions: Subjects performed 3 exercises in a balanced order, repeating each exercise 5 times while surface electromyography (EMG) was recorded from the 5 muscle sites. Exercises were divided into 2 phases: movement and stabilization. The root-mean-square amplitude of the EMG for each phase was calculated and normalized to the maximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) amplitude for each muscle. A 2-factor repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) tested the muscle by exercise interaction and the main effects for each phase separately.

Main Outcome Measures: Normalized activation amplitude was the main dependent variable. Ensemble-average curves were calculated to examine the phasing of activation.

Results: ANOVA showed a statistically signiﬁcant interaction (p <.05) for both phases, indicating the 3 exercises recruited the 5 muscle sites using different patterns of relative activation. The external oblique (EO) muscle site was activated to higher amplitudes than the other 4 sites in all 3 exercises for both phases. The highest activity was recorded from the EO during the pelvic tilt, just more than 25% of MVIC. The only exercise to recruit the erector spine to signiﬁcantly higher amplitudes than the multifidus site was the TST level 1.

Conclusions: Study exercises were not interchangeable for the patterns of trunk muscle activation amplitudes. The exercises did not recruit the abdominal muscles to adequate levels for strengthening for this healthy sample; however, all 5 muscle sites were activated, forming the basis of a stabilizing exercise approach.

EXERCISE AS A THERAPEUTIC APPROACH to the prevention, treatment, and management of low back pain (LBP) has received increasing support over the past decade. However, controversy exists in the literature about improved outcomes associated with speciﬁc interventions, and most LBP episodes have recovered within 6 weeks regardless of treatment. A recent focus has been on exercises to restore dynamic stability to the trunk because spinal instability has been linked to the development of low back dysfunction. 

Dynamic instability of the spine has been associated with insufficient strength and endurance of the trunk stabilizing muscles and inappropriate recruitment of the trunk and abdominal muscles. Therefore, dynamic stability exercises should improve the muscular responsiveness needed to stabilize the spine against perturbations associated with movement and activities of daily living, emphasizing proper sequencing of muscle activation, co-activating synergistic muscles, and restoring muscle strength and endurance to key trunk stabilizers. 

Although many therapeutic exercises are used to manage low back dysfunction, this study focuses on exercises of abdominal musculature, particularly those exercises performed in the supine position. The 3 exercises examined were the pelvic tilt, abdominal hollowing, and level 1 of the trunk stability test (TST level 1). The latter has been used as an initial progression to assess trunk musculature ability to maintain trunk stability and as a therapeutic exercise. 

The aim of this study was to quantify and compare the activation amplitudes of speciﬁc muscle sites and to use this information to assess the potential of each exercise to recruit speciﬁc muscles in a manner consistent with the objectives of dynamic stability exercises.The final objective was to use the relative activation amplitudes to assess back extensor co-activation, a neuromuscular control strategy important to maintain trunk stability. In particular, the intersegmental multifidus (MT) muscle had a greater role in stability than such superficial trunk extensors as the erector spine (ES) muscle. 

Our specific objectives were to measure the relative activation amplitudes from 3 abdominal and 2 trunk extensor muscle sites of healthy subjects performing the pelvic tilt, abdominal hollowing, and TST level 1 exercises and to compare the activation amplitudes among muscle sites and exercises. The main dependent variable was relative activation amplitude measured by surface EMG, normalized to maximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) amplitudes. We hypothesized that: (1) the patterns of recruitment amplitudes for the 5 muscle sites are different among the 3 exercises; (2) the relative activation amplitudes among the 5 muscle sites are different, showing selective recruitment of abdominal sites and minimal co-activation; and (3) the relative activation amplitudes among the 3 exercises are different, showing that the neuromuscular demands of each exercise are different.

Twenty-four healthy men aged 20 to 54 years, without known neuromuscular, orthopedic, or cardiovascular conditions, volunteered to participate in the study. Subjects were recruited through advertisements posted at a military base in various departments, at the base hospital and gymnasium, and on the Internet. The study was restricted to men to reduce variability associated with sex. Subjects with a history of LBP, spinal deformities, or previous spinal surgery were excluded.

During an initial session, subjects were informed of the project, and written consent was obtained, with the approval of the Faculty of Graduate Studies and Health Professions Ethics Committees of Dalhousie University (Halifax, NS, Canada). A postural assessment was conducted by a physiotherapist with 15 years’ orthopedic clinical experience to ensure that subjects had no structural spinal deformity. 

Subjects were graded for minimal abdominal strength using the trunk raising forward exercise to provide an objective assessment of minimal muscle function and to compare percentages from this sample with results from a previous study of abdominal muscle exercise progressions. No inclusion or exclusion criteria were based on participation in an abdominal exercise or other exercise program, and no subjects had previously performed the study exercises.

Subjects were instructed how to perform the 3 study exercises and asked to practice them 10 times each on 3 separate days. They were given a written description of the exercises and asked to report the number of practice sessions between the initial session and test session. 

The test session occurred 1 to 2 weeks later, and EMG data were collected. The subjects’ age (years), mass (kilograms), height (centimeters), number of practice sessions from the initial session, and physical activity level were recorded. Physical activity level was defined as the average number of training sessions weekly, including at least 30 minutes of cardiovascular fitness.

Subjects were excluded if they were unable to perform 1 or more of the 3 exercises on test day. EMG signals were recorded from 3 abdominal and 2 trunk extensor sites during the performance of a series of normalization exercises and the 3 study exercises.

Before the test trials, subjects performed 6 different normalization procedures, 4 for the abdominal and 2 for the trunk extensor groups, in an attempt to elicit a maximal effort. The exercises were: (1) restrained sit-up effort, in which subjects produced maximal effort against a restraining strap across the chest, intended to elicit high URA and LRA activity; (2) hanging supine, in which subjects lowered the trunk to the horizontal until they were leaning over the edge of the plinth with the trunk horizontal and the umbilicus in line with the edge of the plinth, intended to elicit high LRA and EO activity; (3) trunk rotation to the left, in which subjects were seated, secured by straps across the hips and chest, and required to produce maximal rotation without trunk flexion, intended to produce high EO activity.The exercises in question that subjects performed are as follows:

1. Pelvic tilt exercise: Subjects laid supine on an exercise table with knees flexed and feet flat, hips flexed to 70° as measured by a goniometer. They were instructed to tighten their abdominals, roll their pelvis backward, flatten their low back so it came in contact with the exercise table, and maintain this position until the end of the 4-second exercise.

2. Abdominal hollowing exercises: Subjects lay supine on a exercise table with knees flexed and feet flat, hips flexed to 70° as measured by a goniometer. They were instructed to tighten their abdominals, bring their navel up and in toward the spine, and maintain this position until the end of the 4-second exercise. The exercise performance was closely monitored to ensure that subjects were not tilting the pelvis backward or inhaling and elevating the rib cage to make the abdomen look flat.

3. TST level 1 exercise: Subjects lay supine with hips and knees bent and feet flat on the exercise table and placed their fingertips on each side of the abdomen just above the pelvis and below the rib cage. They were instructed to tighten their abdominals, bring their navel up and in toward the spine, and hold this position until the end of the 4-second exercise. Once the spine was stabilized, subjects lifted their right foot off the exercise table until the thigh was vertical and the hip angle was 90°. The left leg was then lifted to the same position. Legs were lowered 1 at a time to the starting position in the same order. Trials in which the back arched during the second phase of the exercise were discarded, and the exercise trial was repeated, emphasizing the need to keep the stomach up and in and maintain the pelvis stable while lifting the legs.The pelvic tilt, abdominal hollowing and TST level 1 exercises were divided into two phases. For the abdominal hollowing and TST level 1 exercises, phase 1 was from the ‘‘Go’’ command until the abdomen was flattened or hollowed. During phase 2, the low back and pelvis were stabilized, after which subjects were told to relax. The testing positions and phases were determined by a single examiner.

The EMG digitized signals were converted to millivolts using a Fortran program that corrected the data for DC offsets and biases and to calculate the amplitude of the EMG signal at the skin electrode interface. Root-mean-square (RMS) amplitudes were calculated for the normalization trials by a computer algorithm. For the test trials, a computer program separated the two phases based on the event marker and RMSij for each trial and each muscle.

Twenty-eight subjects were initially screened; 2 could not be tested because of hardware problems, and 2 could not perform the abdominal hollowing exercise on the test day. Twenty-four men completed the study. The times taken to complete phase 1 of each exercise were fairly similar. Homogeneity of variance assumption was violated and data were transformed using an arc sine transform of the normalized data. There were no differences in NRMS amplitude across trials or for order. 
The data from these studies are shown in Table 1. This shows the means for NRMS for phases 1 and 2. ANOVA showed a statistically significant muscle site.Exercise interaction for both phase 1 and phase 2. Subsequently, effects of exercise were tested by fixing muscle site, and effects of muscle site were tested by fixing exercise using the Bonferroni t test. Statistically significant differences in NRMS amplitudes were found among muscle sites within each exercise. The EO was activated at a significantly higher level than the other 4 muscle sites for all 3 exercises for both phases. The LRA and URA were not significantly different from each other for the exercises. TST level 1 was the only exercise in which ES activity was significantly higher than MT activity, which occurred for both phases. The multiple comparisons among exercises within muscles sites are shown for phase 1 and phase 2. Interaction was statistically significant. The between-exercise significant differences are indicated for each muscle site. Significant difference from abdominal hollowing. Significant difference from TST level 1. Significant difference from pelvic tilt. Critical for 184df.The pelvic tilt NRMS amplitude for the EO was significantly higher (p /H11021.0016) than the abdominal hollowing and TST level 1 exercises for both phases, whereas the TST-level 1 EO activation was only higher than the abdominal hollowing for phase 2. The RA amplitudes for the abdominal hollowing exercise were significantly lower (p /H11021.0016) than the amplitudes recorded for the pelvic tilt and TST level 1 exercise.

The ensemble-average profiles for the 5 muscles are shown in figures 4 through 6 for the pelvic tilt, abdominal hollowing, and TST level 1 exercises, respectively. These figures show the typical pattern of activity for the majority of subjects for the 3. 

Coefficients of variation for LRA, URA, EO, ES, and MT are 54%, 50%, 60%, 60%, and 80%, respectively.

Coefficients of variation for LRA, URA, EO, ES, and MT are 56%, 48%, 59%, 56%, and 52%, respectively.No statistical testing was performed on the patterns, and with the exception of the initial increase in amplitude for the abdominal muscles, there were minimal changes in activation amplitude over time. Phase 2 of the TST level 1 exercise showed a slight biphasic trend; however, amplitude change was minimal. The 2 extensor sites maintained a constant level for the pelvic tilt and abdominal hollowing, as did the MT for the TST level 1 exercise over the total exercise time. The ES site for the TST level 1 exercise showed a gradual increase during phase 1 and a slight variation in amplitude during phase 2, similar to the 2 RA sites. The coefficients of variation on figures 4 through 6 for the ensemble-average profiles indicate large between-subject variability in the activation amplitudes used to perform the 3 exercises.

The purpose of this study was to measure and compare EMG amplitudes from selected abdominal and trunk extensor muscle sites during the performance of 3 therapeutic exercises used to manage LBP. The results show that the patterns of recruitment amplitudes for the 5 muscle sites examined were different among the exercises, and the multiple comparisons both support and refute some of the claims associated with the 3 exercises. EMG profiles show similarities and differences in trunk muscle activation among the muscles and exercises for this study sample of healthy men.

Although the sample was composed only of men, there was a range in subjects’ age, mass, height, and physical activity. The minimal abdominal muscle test showed that this sample was similar to a previous report for unimpaired healthy subjects because 25% of the subjects were unable to complete it. Because none of the covariates or subsets of covariates was significant, they do not readily explain the significant differences found in EMG data. Therefore, the variability in EMG amplitudes among subjects should be expected from a similar healthy population.

Twenty of the 28 screened subjects had difficulty performing the abdominal hollowing and TST level 1 exercises correctly during the initial session, indicating the exercises pose a motor learning challenge to some subjects. The practice sessions were sufficient for 26 of the subjects to perform the 3 exercises correctly on the test day. Correct and consistent performance of the exercises was important because differences in EMG amplitudes between correct and incorrect performance of the pelvic tilt have been reported, and consistency of performance was shown to improve with learning. The 2 subjects who were unable to perform the exercises on test day were not tested because incorrect performance could confound the results.

The patterns of activation amplitudes for the 3 exercises were different, substantiated by the statistically significant muscle-site-by-exercise interaction and shown by the interaction plots. These results provide evidence that the 5 muscle sites were recruited in different relative proportions to perform the exercises. The comparisons among exercises and among muscle sites specifically show where these differences occur and shed light on the motor strategies used to perform the exercises.Tilt NRMS amplitudes were higher for all 3 abdominal sites for both phases compared with the abdominal hollowing exercises. Although RA sites were higher for the pelvic tilt, they were less than 15% of MVIC and therefore do not support claims that the abdominal hollowing exercise is a better stabilization maneuver, based on claims that the pelvic tilt recruits high activity from the RA. 

The results also do not support claims that abdominal hollowing is better able to recruit selectively the EO because both exercises recruited the EO to significantly higher NRMS amplitudes than the 2 RA sites, with the pelvic tilt EO activity significantly higher than the abdominal hollowing.

Phase 1 for the abdominal hollowing and TST level 1 exercises are essentially the same; therefore, the significantly higher RA activity for the TST level 1 was not expected. A plausible explanation for the differences was that all subjects were prepared for the postural adjustment required in the TST because they had practiced the exercises. The higher abdominal muscle activity for all 3 abdominal sites for phase 2 of the TST level 1 was expected compared with abdominal hollowing because the leg-raising perturbation should require higher muscle activity to stabilize the spine. 

Linear and quasilinear relationships have been reported between percentage of maximal torque and percentage of maximal RMS amplitudes. This relationship has been used to evaluate training effects of therapeutic exercises based on surface EMG recordings.

The overload principle provides the basis for eliciting a strengthening response, and muscle contraction intensities of 60% or higher of their maximal voluntary level are normally recommended to promote a strength training effect. The percentage of MVIC for the LRA and URA for the pelvic tilt was consistent with previous qualitative descriptions of mild to moderate activity. 

The EO amplitudes were 2 to 3 times higher than the 2 RA sites for the 3 exercises, thus supporting selective activation of this muscle to a greater percentage of MVIC. 

A low percentage of MVIC from the trunk musculature stabilizes the spine during normal movements, and motor control, not just muscle strength, is important to dynamic stability training. Our results showed that the recruitment amplitudes do not support a strength training effect; however, all 3 exercises recruited the 5 muscle sites and perhaps with increased repetition, could improve the endurance of these muscles, which are an important component associated with dynamic stability. 

Normalization must be considered when drawing conclusions from EMG studies of therapeutic exercises, in particular when making between-muscle comparisons. Differences of opinion exist about the best normalization procedures.It is particularly important for the abdominal muscles because they are not activated in a linear manner and different exercises have been shown to elicit maximum EMG from different muscle sites for different subjects. Researchers reporting on procedures for using surface EMG to assess low back dysfunction have recently recommended a maximal effort for normalization purposes. Although there have been difficulties eliciting maximal efforts, the percentage of maximum that a muscle is activated has a physiologic meaning, providing a basis for interpreting the EMG amplitudes and comparing them among muscle sites. It was assumed that subjects in this study produced a maximal effort during the normalization procedures; however, if they did not, then the reported relative amplitudes would be overestimated. This would provide even stronger evidence to support the conclusions related to strengthening potential or minimal trunk extensor co-activation for these exercises.

No previous reports of the EMG patterns for the 3 exercises were found, although raw tracings for individual subjects can be found for the pelvic tilt and abdominal hollowing for selected muscles. The coefficients of variation in figures 4 through 6 were high for the ensemble-average patterns; however, for most muscle sites, they were similar to those reported for walking, a well-learned cyclic activity. The profiles support synergistic activation among the abdominal muscles for the pelvic tilt and TST level 1 exercises during phase 1 because all 3 sites increase during this phase. The gradual increase in activation for the ES and abdominal sites shown in figure 6 during phase 1 of the TST level 1 supports co-activation among the abdominals and ES, an important component of stability. Further study is needed to compare the patterns and determine whether they differ for those unable to perform the exercises correctly.

Choosing exercise approaches in the management of LBP is difficult because of the multifactorial nature of the problem, difficulty determining exact causes, and the number of treatment options available. Using surface EMG to manage low back dysfunction has provided valuable objective information. Knowing the normal recruitment pattern for therapeutic exercises is essential to understand the potential impact of an exercise approach for specific causes of low back dysfunction. These data provide an objective foundation to help decide the value of the 3 exercises in the management of specific low back disorders. It is hypothesized that those who are unable to stabilize the spine or perform these exercises correctly and those with LBP would have different relative EMG amplitudes compared with the healthy unimpaired subjects in this study. Determining where these differences exist in those with low back dysfunction compared with healthy subjects should improve objectivity in decisions about exercise treatment approaches intended to recruit specific muscle sites.

A comprehensive analysis of surface EMG showed measurable differences in the relative EMG amplitudes among exercises and muscle sites, providing evidence that the exercises were different with respect to muscle activation patterns. For this healthy unimpaired sample, none of the exercises recruited the muscle sites to a level deemed effective for a strength training response. There was evidence to support selective recruitment of the EO compared with the 2 RA sites, but not between the LRA and URA for all 3 exercises. There was evidence to support abdominal and ES co-activation during the TST level 1 exercise, but there was minimal trunk extensor activity for the pelvic tilt and abdominal hollowing exercises.Muscle activity in upper and lower rectus abdominus during abdominal exercises. Electromyographic study of the differential action of the abdominal muscles during exercise. Muscle activities during asymmetric trunk angular accelerations. Spinal stability and intersegmental muscle forces: a biomechanical model. Muscles testing and function. An electromyographic validation of an abdominal muscle test. Noise and artefact. A functional subdivision of the lumbar extensor musculature: recruitment patterns and force-RA-EMG relationships under isometric conditions. EMG interpretation. Functional muscle: effects on electromyographic output. Electromyographic activity of the abdominal and low back musculature during the generation of isometric and dynamic axial trunk torque: implications for lumbar mechanics. Electromyographic analysis of three trunk stability exercises in normal healthy subjects. EMG study of erector spinae and multifidus in two isometric back extension exercises. Electromyographic activity of back musculature during Williams’ flexion exercises. Numerical recipes in Fortran. A comparison of the electromyographic normalization procedures for abdominal and trunk extensors. EMG profiles during normal human walking: stride to stride and inter-subject variability. Contributions to probability and statistics. Participation of the abdominal muscles in various movements of the trunk in man: an electromyographic study. Contraction of the abdominal muscles associated with movement of the lower limb. Myoelectric signal versus force relationship in different human muscles. Relative EMG levels in training exercises for abdominal and hip flexor muscles. Lesions of the lumbosacral spine: part 11. Chronic traumatic (postural) destruction of the lumbosacral intervertebral disc. The stabilizing function of the mm ilioscostales and the mm multifidi during walking. Electromyographic study of the anterolateral abdominal musculature utilizing indwelling electrodes. Clinical application in surface electromyography: chronic musculoskeletal pain. Electromyography in ergonomics. Normalization of EMG amplitude: an evaluation and comparison of old and new methods. Muscle activity during therapeutic exercises.
