The Influence of Frequency, Intensity, Volume and Mode of Strength Training on Whole Muscle Cross-Sectional Area in Humans

Mathias Wernbom, Jesper Augustsson and Roland Thome´e Lundberg Laboratory for Human Muscle Function and Movement Analysis, Department of Orthopaedics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, G¨oteborg University, G¨oteborg, Sweden SportRehab Physical Therapy and Sports Medicine Clinic, G¨oteborg, Sweden

Methods 
Literature Search 
Classification of Muscle Actions, Training Methods and Modalities
Quantification of Exercise Frequency, Intensity and Volume
Classification of Training Status
Calculation of Changes and Rate of Changes in Muscle Cross-Sectional Area (CSA)

Results Part 1: Quadriceps Studies
Quadriceps Studies: Dynamic External Resistance 
Length of Training Period, Average Increase in CSA and CSA Per Day
Rate of Gain in CSA: Men versus Women
Frequency
Intensity
Volume
Quadriceps Studies: Accommodating Resistance 
Length of Training Period, Average Increase in CSA and CSA Per Day
Frequency
Velocity
Torque
Volume
Total Duration Per Session
Time-Torque Product Per Session
Quadriceps Studies: Isometric Resistance
Length of Training Period, Average Increase in CSA and CSA Per Day
Frequency
Intensity
Volume
Quadriceps Studies: Combined Strength and Endurance Training
Rate of Gain in CSA: Combined Training versus Pure Strength Training
Length of Training Period and Increase in CSA
Quadriceps Studies: All Voluntary Training Modes
Length of Training Period and Increase in CSA
Quadriceps Studies: Strength Training as a Countermeasure During UnloadingStrength training is an important component in sports training and rehabilitation. Quantification of the dose-response relationships between training variables and the outcome is fundamental for the proper prescription of resistance training. The purpose of this comprehensive review was to identify dose-response relationships for the development of muscle hypertrophy by calculating the magnitudes and rates of increases in muscle cross-sectional area induced by varying levels of frequency, intensity and volume, as well as by different modes of strength training.

Computer searches in the databases MEDLINE, SportDiscus and CINAHL were performed as well as hand searches of relevant journals, books and reference lists. The analysis was limited to the quadriceps femoris and the elbow flexors, since these were the only muscle groups that allowed for evaluations of dose-response trends. The modes of strength training were classified as dynamic external resistance (including free weights and weight machines), accommodating resistance (e.g. isokinetic and semi-isokinetic devices) and isometric resistance. The subcategories related to the types of muscle actions used. The results demonstrate that given sufficient frequency, intensity and volume of work, all three types of muscle actions can induce significant hypertrophy at an impressive rate and that, at present, there is insufficient evidence for the superiority of any mode and/or type of muscle action over other modes and types of training. Tentative dose-response relationships for each variable are outlined, based on the available evidence, and interactions between variables are discussed. In addition, recommendations for training and suggestions for further research are given.Strength training has become increasingly popular in recent decades. Whereas previously strength training had been used by a few selected athletes to improve their strength and size, it is now an important component in training for most sports as well as for injury prevention and rehabilitation. Quantification of the dose-response relationships between the training variables (e.g. intensity, frequency and volume) and the outcome (e.g. strength, power and hypertrophy) is fundamental for the proper prescription of resistance training. 

Scanning methods such as MRI and CT are regarded as the gold standard for assessing whole muscle size. To our knowledge, no systematic review has been published that has analyzed the impact of several important training variables such as frequency, intensity and volume on changes in muscle area or volume as measured by scanning methods. Such a review could provide evidence-based guidelines for the prescription of strength training for increasing muscle mass. Establishing efficient models of strength training for hypertrophy in humans could also be of value for the study of the physiological mechanisms of the hypertrophy process.

Implicit in many articles in the literature are the following assumptions: (i) training for strength and training for hypertrophy is essentially one and the same thing; and (ii) the programme that yields the largest increases in strength also results in the largest increases in muscle mass. These assumptions are not necessarily true in all situations. For example, studies by Choi et al. and Masuda et al. showed smaller increases in one repetition maximum (1RM) and isometric strength, but greater increases in quadriceps muscle area (as measured by magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) and MFA after a typical moderate-load bodybuilding regimen when compared with a high-intensity powerlifting programme. Schmidtbleicher and Buehrle showed greater increases for triceps brachii muscle area (as measured by CT scanning) for a group that trained with 3 sets of 12 repetitions at 70% of 1RM when compared with a group that trained with 7 sets of 1–3 repetitions at 90–100% of 1RM, while the strength increases for the groups were similar. Thus, it is apparent from these and other studies that the training prescription for hypertrophy may differ somewhat from the prescription for maximum strength.the quadriceps was by far the most studied muscle group in humans undergoing strength training and that the elbow flexors (biceps brachii and brachialis) were the second most studied muscle group. Currently, these are probably the only muscle groups that allow for meaningful evaluation of dose-response trends. Therefore, the present review is focused on the human quadriceps and elbow flexors.

For the purposes of this review, the terminology of Knuttgen and Komi[22] was adopted for the classification of muscle actions. Accordingly, exercise can be classified as either static (involving isometric muscle actions) or dynamic (involving concentric and/or eccentric muscle actions). During an isometric muscle action, the muscle develops force but no external movement occurs and the length of the muscle-tendon complex does not change. During a concentric action, the muscle produces force while shortening. An eccentric muscle action refers to a situation where the muscle produces force while lengthening.

In resistance exercise, training methods or modalities are often classified according to the type of resistance used. Isometric training obviously involves isometric actions. Isotonic training refers to dynamic exercise in which the muscle(s) exerts a constant tension. this is not true in the intact muscle of a person performing an exercise because of biomechanical factors such as changes in the lengths of the lever arms of the muscle and of the resistance, and also the accelerations and decelerations that occur during dynamic exercise. Thus, evenif the external resistance remains constant, the muscle will not develop a constant level of force. 

For this reason, the term ‘isotonic’ is often replaced by the term ‘dynamic constant external resistance’ (DCER). In DCER exercise, the absolute load is constant throughout the movement, as when lifting a dumbbell. Further examples of DCER would be simple cable pulley systems with no lever arms and machines with circle shaped cams. The term ‘variable resistance’ is used when the resistance throughout the range of motion is varied, for example by an irregularly shaped camwheel or a lever arm.Strength training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 229 idea with variable resistance is to closely match the type of training, but Murphy and Wilson have used the exact same term to describe DCER training. With isoinertial flywheel ergometers, as with isokinetic training, the resistance is effort dependent for each type of action. Therefore, this mode of exercise will be included in the ‘accommodating resistance’ category. 

1.3 Quantification of Exercise Frequency, Intensity, and Volume Regarding exercise intensity in dynamic external resistance training, we chose to express intensity as a function of 1RM in the exercise(s) performed for the muscle group in question (e.g., 80% of 1RM in the squat). In many of the studies, the authors provided exact percentages or at least estimates of the percentage. 

In isokinetic training, muscle actions are performed at a constant angular velocity, which is controlled by the machine. Unlike dynamic external resistance training, there is no set resistance to overcome; however, since the velocity is controlled, any force applied against the equipment results in an equal and opposite reaction force. Since the subject can freely vary the level of effort in the entire movement to accommodate for pain or weakness in certain regions of the range of motion, the isokinetic mode is very useful in rehabilitation. Isokinetics is sometimes sorted into a category called ‘accommodating resistance’.

Also included in this category are devices in which the resistance is provided by hydraulic cylinders, which function by limiting the flow through an adjustable aperture. Although not providing a strictly isokinetic movement, the resistance setting on these machines can be adjusted to limit the velocity within relatively narrow ranges. These devices are sometimes also referred to as semi-isokinetic.

Another form of strength training uses the inertia of a flywheel for resistance. In this type of ergometer, the force exerted by the subject is transferred to a strap being wound around the axle of a fixed flywheel. A concentric muscle action unwinds the strap and overcomes the inertia of the flywheel, setting it spinning on low friction bearings. The rotating flywheel soon causes the strap to start winding up again; therefore, the machine returns the stored energy of the spinning flywheel via the strap and the subject tries to resist the returning movement by performing an eccentric muscle action.

While the quantification of exercise intensity in conventional resistance training and isometric training is relatively straightforward, how to express the intensity or load for isokinetic and other accommodating training modes is less obvious. The force-velocity relationship of skeletal muscle dictates that as the velocity of the concentric muscle action increases, the maximum possible force decreases. Depending on the training status, the maximum torque developed by the quadriceps during eccentric muscle actions is slightly higher (trained subjects) or not significantly higher (sedentary subjects) than the maximum isometric torque. In cases where the peak torque during eccentric muscle actions exceeds that of isometric muscle actions, the peak torqueThe text after cleaning:

Increases only marginally with increasing velocity sessions per muscle group per week, as opposed to training days per week. For example, a training group may have trained the quadriceps twice a day, three days a week. The frequency then is reported as six times per week. We are aware of the possibility that the physiological responses may differ between training once a day six times per week and twice a day three times per week. 

Classification of Training Status: In the majority of the studies, the subjects were reported as either untrained/sedentary or as physically active. Physically active subjects generally performed some form of endurance training, but not any systematic strength training. Since many studies reported varying levels of activity among the participants and because endurance training induces little if any muscle hypertrophy, the categories ‘untrained’ and ‘physically active’ were combined for analyses.

Training volume is a measure of the total amount of work (joules) performed in a given time period. In this review, training volume refers to a single session. In a less strict sense, volume can be estimated by the sum of repetitions or even by the number of sets performed. While simply stating the number of sets may seem a crude measure of volume, several meta-analyses have shown significant differences in strength gains between training with single and multiple sets in favor of multiple sets, particularly for trained subjects. Theoretically, a given exercise volume can be distributed in many different ways and as a consequence result in different adaptations. Therefore, several estimates of volume (number of sets, total number of repetitions, total duration of work and total work) were used in this review. However, instead of expressing the total amount of work performed in joules, work was calculated in arbitrary units (sets × repetitions × intensity). If several exercises were performed for the muscle group (e.g. leg presses and knee extensions for the quadriceps), the volumes for each of these were summed to yield the total volume for the muscle group.

Regarding the training frequency, we have chosen to report frequency as the number of sessions per muscle group per week. In most of the studies reviewed here, the authors reported the changes in Cross-Sectional Area (CSA) or at least the pre- and post-training values. Sometimes, figures were used instead of numerical data; in such cases the graphs were measured if possible. The relative changes were calculated by simply dividing the post- with.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 231 the pre-training values suggest that changes in fibre area are relevant as an index of muscle mass. Ideally, a training study would include measurements at both the cellular level and at the whole muscle level. The changes in mean fibre area are usually of larger magnitude than the changes in anatomical muscle area. However, the focus on changes in whole muscle Cross-Sectional Area (CSA) and volume is justified since these are arguably the most sensitive and representative measures of whole muscle mass.

Although some studies have shown preferential hypertrophy of individual muscles in a muscle group and of different levels in the same muscle, no consistent pattern has emerged yet. In addition, data from other studies suggest that changes in muscle CSA at the middle level and muscle volume after a training period are of a similar magnitude. Studies by Aagaard and co-workers and Tracy et al. have confirmed that quadriceps muscle volume can be accurately predicted from a single scan at the middle level.

2. Results Part 1: Quadriceps Studies 
2.1 Quadriceps Studies: Dynamic External Resistance

After application of the inclusion and exclusion criteria, the literature search resulted in 44 original articles investigating quadriceps muscle CSA or volume before and after DER training. These 44 articles yielded 65 datapoints for CSA. Five of the articles involved trained to elite strength athletes. Four datapoints from four different studies involved training where the subjects finished each set with several repetitions in reserve. Since stopping well short of muscular failure has been shown to yield modest hypertrophy in comparison with performing each set to muscular failure, even when the total volume is similar, these study groups were excluded. As a result, except where
The mean peak intensity (the highest value reached during a session, averaged over the entire period) was 73% of 1RM. The average intensity (the mean of all training sets) was 66% of 1RM. There was a tendency for greater rates of increase for intensities >60% of 1RM when compared with intensities below this level. 

The average length of the training period was 79 days. The shortest study was 14 days and the longest lasted 6 months. The average increase in quadriceps CSA was 8.5% (range: 1.1–17.3%). The average increase per day in CSA for training with combined concentric-eccentric muscle actions (47 datapoints) was 0.12% per day (range: 0.04–0.55%).

The mean number of sets was 6.1 and the mean number of total repetitions was 60. Fourteen datapoints were found in the range of 21–39 repetitions, 14 datapoints in the range of 40–60 repetitions, 11 datapoints in the 66–90 repetition range and finally 6 datapoints in the range ≥100 repetitions per session. The average rate of increase of CSA for each cluster was as follows: 21–39 repetitions = 0.12% per day; 40–60 repetitions = 0.13% per day; 66–90 repetitions = 0.08% per day; and ≥100 repetitions = 0.12% per day. 

The mean training frequency was 2.8 times a week. The most common frequency was three times a week (22 of 47 datapoints), followed by two times a week (17 datapoints). Frequencies between and above these (2.3–4 times per week) were noted in a few cases. For the frequency of two sessions per week, the average increase was 0.11% per day (range: 0.03–0.21%); for three sessions per week, the increase was 0.11% per day (range: 0.04-0.26%).

In six studies, groups of men and groups of women followed exactly the same training programs. The average increases in CSA per day in these studies were 0.13% for men and 0.14% for women.The average length of the training period was 52 days. The shortest study was 13 days and the longest lasted 84 days. The mean total increase in CSA was5.8% (range: 2.5–18.4%) for all types muscle action combined. For pure concentric training, the mean total CSA increase was 6.1% (range: 2.5–18.4%), for pure eccentric training the mean increase was4.2% (range: 2.5–6.2%) and for combined concentric-eccentric training, the corresponding figures were 6.0% (range: 4.1–7.4%). The mean CSA increase per day for pure concentric training was 0.13% (range: 0.05–0.44%), for pure eccentric training 0.06% (range: 0.04–0.09%) and for combined concentric-eccentric training 0.16% (range: 0.06–0.21%). The average CSA increase for all the accommodating resistance modes combined was 0.13% per day.

The mean frequency for concentric training was 3.4 times a week. Three sessions (nine datapoints) per week yielded an average increase in CSA of 0.13% per day and 3.5–4 sessions per week (four datapoints) yielded an average increase in CSA of 0.12% per day. Five sessions (one datapoint) per week yielded an average increase in CSA of 0.22% per day. The largest rate of CSA increase (0.44% per day) was noted in a study using three sessions per week. No concentric training studies were found with training frequencies below three sessions per week or above five sessions per week. 

The literature search resulted in 17 original articles investigating quadriceps muscle CSA or volume before and after an accommodating resistance-training programme. These 17 articles yielded 21 datapoints for CSA. Of these, 14 datapoints involved pure concentric training, three involved pure eccentric training and four involved training with combined concentric-eccentric muscle actions. Some of the studies included subjects with strength training experience. Based on anthropometric and quadriceps muscle CSA data, they were considered as ‘moderately trained’ and are included in the analysis in sections 2.2.1–2.2.7, together with previously untrained and physically active individuals.When the percentage values for eccentric torque were applied and all accommodating modes and types of muscle actions were combined, no relation was found between the maximum torque developed during training and the rate of increase in quadriceps CSA. 

2.2.5 Volume
For pure concentric training, the largest increases occurred when the total number was between 50 and 60 muscle actions (six datapoints, 0.19% increase in CSA per day). The frequency for pure eccentric training was three times per week in all studies (three datapoints). For the combined concentric-eccentric training regimens, the frequencies were two (one datapoint), 2.3 (two datapoints) and three (one datapoint) times per week. No relationship between the frequency and the rate of CSA increase is apparent. If studies with pure eccentric and combined concentric-eccentric muscle actions are included in the analysis, the increases still tend to reach their maximum in the range between 50 and 60 muscle actions per session (ten datapoints, 0.18% increase in CSA per day).

2.2.3 Velocity
For pure concentric training, one datapoint was found for 3 sets, one for 4 sets, six for 5–6 sets, none for 7–9 sets and six for ≥10 sets. The highest increase occurred at 5–6 sets (0.19% increase in CSA per day). The increase in CSA for ≥10 sets was 0.10% per day and the increase for 3–4 sets was 0.06%. For pure concentric training, the most common velocities were 60°/s (seven datapoints, 0.13% increase in CSA per day) and 120°/s (four datapoints, 0.16% increase in CSA per day). Two studies used 180°/s (0.14% increase in CSA per day) and one study used 90°/s (0.05% increase in CSA per day).

2.2.4 Torque
Data from Amiridis et al. suggests that the isokinetic concentric peak torque of the quadriceps expressed as a percentage of maximum isometric torque is ≈59%, 69%, 77% and 88% at the velocities of 180°/s, 120°/s, 90°/s and 60°/s, respectively. No relation was found between the level of torque developed and the rate of increase in CSA. The eccentric peak torque of the quadriceps in relation to the maximum isometric torque is ≈104%, 106% and 104% at the velocities of 30°/s, 60°/s and 90°/s, respectively.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 235
Between 25 and 50 units (0.14% increase in CSA per day), six between 50 and 100 units (0.14% increase in CSA per day) and five in the interval between 100 and 265 units (0.10% increase in CSA per day).

2.3 Quadriceps Studies: Isometric Resistance
The literature search resulted in six original articles investigating quadriceps muscle CSA or volume before and after an isometric resistance training programme, yielding nine data points for CSA.

2.3.1 Length of Training Period, Average Increase Increase in CSA and CSA Per Day
The average length of the training period was 84 days. The shortest study was 56 days and the longest lasted 98 days. The mean increase in total CSA after the training period was 8.9% (range: 4.8–14.6%) and the average rate of CSA increase was 0.11% per day (0.06–0.26%).

2.3.2 Frequency
Three sessions per week (four datapoints) resulted in an increase in CSA of 0.12% per day and four sessions per week (five datapoints) resulted in an increase in CSA of 0.11% per day. The largest rate of gain (0.26% increase in CSA per day) was reported in a study using three sessions per week.

2.3.3 Intensity
The most common intensity was 70% of MVIA (seven datapoints), the intensity in the other two cases was 80% and 100%, respectively. The largest rate of CSA increase (0.26% per day) was found in the study that used the highest training intensity (100% of MVIA).

2.3.4 Volume
The total number of repetitions ranged between 4 and 150. The time each repetition was held ranged between 1 and 30 seconds, while the total duration of muscle work per session was between 80 and 150 seconds. No relation was found between the number of repetitions and the increase per day in CSA. Similarly, when volume was expressed as the total duration per session and as the product of intensity and total duration, no apparent relation between volume and rate of increase in CSA was observed.The literature search resulted in seven original articles investigating quadriceps muscle CSA or volume before and after a combined training programme, yielding ten datapoints. Some of the studies included groups that performed only strength training. Because of the limited data and different modes of endurance training (rowing, running and cycling), as well as the different modes of strength training, no analysis was performed regarding frequency, intensity and volume.

Rate of Gain in CSA: Combined Training versus Pure Strength Training

In four of seven studies, comparisons were made between pure strength training and combined training regarding increases in quadriceps CSA. If these are summarized, the resulting average increases are as follows: pure strength training = 0.09% increase in CSA per day; and combined training = 0.10% increase in CSA per day. If the combined training groups of the other three studies are included, the average rate of CSA increase for combined training becomes 0.12% per day.

Length of Training Period and Increase in CSA

The shortest study was 70 days and the longest lasted 168 days. The mean total increase in CSA after the training period was 15.1%. The largest increase in CSA was 34% (0.24% per day) and the smallest was 3.9% (0.05% per day).

Quadriceps Studies: All Voluntary Training Modes

Length of Training Period and Increase in CSA

Longer training periods generally tended to result in larger increases in CSA. Accordingly, the greatest increase in quadriceps CSA (34%) was noted in one of the longer studies, after 20 weeks of training. There was also an apparent tendency for the rate of increase in CSA to decrease with increasing lengths of the training period.

Quadriceps Studies: Strength Training as a Countermeasure During Unloading

The literature search resulted in eight original articles investigating quadriceps muscle CSA or volume before and after a resistance training programme as a countermeasure during otherwise unloaded conditions (bed rest or limb suspension). These eight papers yielded nine datapoints for CSA for the training groups and nine datapoints for the control groups, which performed no training. The mean decrease in quadriceps CSA for unloading was discussed.Stimulation to evoke muscle actions, in the first study, previously untrained subjects performed 3–5 sets of 10 unilateral combined concentric and eccentric actions in an isokinetic dynamometer at a velocity of 75°/s, for two sessions per week for 9 weeks. The increase in quadriceps CSA was 10.1% (0.16% per day). In the second study, from the same research group, recreationally resistance-trained subjects performed an identical protocol to that in the first study, for two sessions per week for 8 weeks. These subjects continued their normal resistance-training regimens during the study, including exercises for the quadriceps of both sides. The increase in CSA was 9.8% (0.18% per day). The control limb that performed only regular resistance exercise showed no increase in quadriceps CSA. Another group performed exactly the same program but also received creatine supplementation. This group increased the CSA with 12.1% (0.22% per day) but this was not significantly greater than the other (placebo) group. The control limb that performed regular resistance exercise only showed a slight increase (5%) in quadriceps CSA. In the third study, electromyostimulation was used to evoke 40 isometric muscle actions per session, four sessions a week for 8 weeks. The increase in CSA was 6% (0.11% per day).

Elbow Flexor Studies: Dynamic External Resistance 
The literature search resulted in 16 original articles investigating elbow flexor (biceps and brachialis) muscle CSA or volume before and after a DER training programme with specific exercises for the elbow flexors. These papers yielded 36 data points for CSA. Three of the papers (seven data points) included highly-trained subjects, while one paper included recreationally-trained subjects (one data point), who had previously trained without any structured programs or specific goals. Based on strength and CSA data, the latter group was regarded as ‘moderately trained’ and included in the analysis of ‘untrained’ and ‘physically active’ subjects.

Quadriceps Studies: 
Electromyostimulation 
The literature search resulted in three original articles investigating quadriceps muscle CSA in healthy uninjured subjects before and after a resistance training program using electro-myostimulation. 
Intensity
The mean peak intensity (the highest value reached during a session, averaged over the entire period) was 72%, which was the same as the average intensity (the mean of all training sets), since no study reported using different loads during one and the same session. The highest mean intensity reported was 180% of 1RM, in a study that used eccentric overload, in addition to performing the concentric phase with a lower resistance. This was also the only study that used such overload; the others used the same resistance in both types of muscle actions. The lowest resistance reported in a study was 10%. When the intensity was plotted against the rate of increase, a tendency was found for the rate to increase with increasing intensity. The highest rates of increase tended to occur around 75% of 1RM.

Length of Training Period, Average Increase in CSA and CSA Per Day 
The average length of the training period was 91 days. The shortest study was 30 days and the longest lasted 6 months. The average increase in flexor CSA was 15.8% and the average increase per day in CSA was 0.20%. The highest increase in elbow flexor CSA (33%) was noted in the longest study, after 6 months of training, although an almost equal increase (32.6%) was observed in another study after 11 weeks.

Frequency 
The mean training frequency was 2.9 times a week. The most common frequency was three times a week, followed by two times a week. The highest frequency was four times per week. No studies were found that involved training at frequencies of less than two times per week. The highest rate of CSA increase was noted for a training study with a frequency of four times per week. For the frequency of three sessions per week, the average CSA increase was 0.18% per day and for two sessions per week, the CSA increase was 0.18% per day.

Volume
The results for the number of repetitions versus CSA per day are shown in figure 11. The mean number of sets was 5.4 and the mean number of total repetitions was 47. Three clusters of datapoints were identified as follows: (i) 7–38 repetitions; (ii) 42–66 repetitions; and (iii) 74–120 repetitions. The maximum rate of CSA increase was found in the interval between 42 and 66 repetitions. For 7–38 repetitions, the CSA increase was 0.15% per day, and for 74–120 repetitions, the rate was 0.18% per day. For total sets, the rate of CSA increase appeared to peak between 4 and 6 sets.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 239
3.3 Elbow Flexor Studies: Isometric Resistance

The literature search resulted in three original articles investigating elbow flexor muscle CSA before and after an isometric resistance training programme, with a total of three datapoints for CSA. The mean CSA increase per day was 0.14%. The largest total increase in CSA (23.0%) was noted for the longest study, which lasted 100 days. The frequency was six times a week for two studies (0.23% average CSA increase per day and 0.06% per day, respectively) and three times per week for the third study (0.13% per day). The intensity in the three studies was 100%, 67% and 80% of MVIA, respectively. The number of total repetitions was 3–24. The total duration of contractile activity was 30 seconds in two studies and 96 seconds in the third study.

3.2 Elbow Flexor Studies: Accommodating Resistance

The literature search resulted in three original articles investigating elbow flexor muscle CSA before and after an accommodating resistance training programme, yielding four datapoints for CSA. Of these, two datapoints involved pure concentric training and two involved pure eccentric training. The longest study was 140 days and the shortest was 56 days. The mean CSA increases per day were 0.16% and 0.12% for concentric and eccentric training, respectively. Both the largest increase in total CSA (16.3%, 0.12% per day) and the highest rate of CSA increase (0.20% per day, 11% total increase in CSA) was noted for concentric training. The frequency was three times a week for all studies. The number of sets and repetitions per set was 4.6 and 10, respectively. The average total duration of contractile activity was 84.8 seconds (range: 13.9–146.2 seconds).In more conventional training, training once a day was found insufficient to prevent all atrophy. Training once daily using a leg press, with coupled concentric-eccentric actions at 90% of 1RM, preserved the muscle volume but failed to induce significant hypertrophy. Further research is thus required to address the effects of different exercise modes and regimens, as well as the impact of the unloading model employed.

For elbow flexor training with dynamic external resistance, the greatest rate of increase in CSA (0.59% per day; 17.7% total increase in CSA) was observed in a study with a frequency of four times a week. However, the average values suggest that there is relatively little difference between training the elbow flexors two or three times per week, in terms of the rate of increase in CSA.

All accommodating resistance training studies involving the elbow flexors used a frequency of three times a week. For isometric elbow flexor training, the highest rate of CSA increase (0.23% per day) was noted for a study with a frequency of six times per week. 

For the unloading plus resistance exercise counter-measure studies, the highest rate of CSA gain (0.30% per day) was noted for the study with the greatest training frequency (14 sessions per week). 

While a higher than normal training frequency (four or more times per week) can result in rapid hypertrophy in the initial stage, it is noted that several of these studies lasted only between 2 and 4 weeks. It is uncertain if training at these high frequencies would continue to yield positive hypertrophy outcomes over a longer duration.The groups that trained two and three times per week gained significantly more in 1RM strength and quadriceps CSA (5.99% and 6.75%, respectively) than the group that trained once a week (3.1% increase in CSA). There was no difference between training two and three times per week. Wirth and colleagues investigated the effects of frequency on elbow flexor CSA in subjects that trained once, twice and three times a week for 8 weeks. All groups performed several types of arm curls for a total of 5 sets of 8–12 repetitions in each session. The groups that trained two and three times per week gained significantly more in elbow flexor CSA (6.6% and 7.4%, respectively) than the group that trained once a week (3.9%).

The results of Vikne and Wirth are remarkably similar despite using different muscle groups and training modes. In both reports, two and three sessions per week yielded almost twice the increase in muscle CSA when compared with one session, with no apparent further advantage for three versus two sessions. This seems logical in view of the typical pattern of changes in muscle protein synthesis after a resistance training session, with peak synthesis rates observed between 3 and 24 hours, and with elevated rates sometimes lasting between 48 and 72 hours after exercise. However, it cannot be excluded that larger volumes and/ or different modes of training would yield different results. Furthermore, the total weekly volumes were not matched between the groups in the studies of Vikne and Wirth.

Anecdotally, many bodybuilders and other strength athletes only train each muscle group specifically between one and two times per week, sometimes even less often. On the other hand, weightlifters are known to perform exercises involving their quadriceps for several sessions per training day. It is not known if bodybuilding regimens are superior to the training regimens performed by powerlifters and olympic lifters. Training each muscle group once a week has been shown to result in increases in muscle.The studies reviewed show that there is a remarkably wide range of intensities that may produce hypertrophy. Still, there seems to be some relationship between the load (or torque) and the rate of increase in CSA, at least for dynamic external resistance training, but this relationship is not a straightforward one. 

Previous research supports that experienced subjects showed superior increases in lean body mass for three training sessions per week versus only one per week per muscle group, even when the total weekly volume remained the same for the two groups. 

In contrast, the study of Farthing and Chilibeck seems to confirm the importance of the force developed during training for the hypertrophic response. Their study found the hypertrophic response was evaluated with measurements of muscle thickness by ultrasound. The greatest increase in thickness was found in the fast eccentric group, followed by the slow eccentric group, the slow concentric group, and the fast concentric group. The authors interpreted their results as a confirmation of the theory that greater force production leads to greater hypertrophy. 

However, this interpretation may be premature since the protocols differed greatly in terms of torque-time integral and in the volume of work performed. It is possible that a local overtraining response was developing in the slow eccentric group. 

Support for this possibility comes from an earlier study by Paddon-Jones and colleagues, who used similar eccentric training regimens. Their results generally showed increases in elbow flexor torque for both fast and slow eccentric training after 5 weeks of training, but at 10 weeks the torque values of the slow group were either halted or even back to the baseline values while the fast group continued to increase. 

In terms of intensity, it appears that intensities of approximately 70–85% of 1RM are sufficient to induce high rates of increase and that even heavier loads do not necessarily result in greater CSA gains. In the categories of accommodating resistance, where the effort is usually maximum from the first repetition, there was no relation between the torque developed and the rate of gain in CSA, regardless of whether eccentric muscle actions were included in the analysis or not.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 243 continued to gain. The authors suggested that the low the reported maximum velocity of unloaded knee extensions, which may reach values of great cumulative stress of the slow protocol had caused an overtraining-like response. The results of Shepstone et al. confirmed the findings of Farthing and Chilibeck regarding the superiority of fast versus slow eccentric training for the hypertrophic response of the elbow flexors. 

However, this study is open to the same interpretation regarding the possibility of a local overtraining response in the slow eccentric group, since the difference in torque-time integral between the fast and slow protocol was even greater (>10-fold) than in the preceding studies. Moreover, the slight differences in peak torque between the fast and the slow eccentric velocities in the studies mentioned here argues against the level of torque as the primary explanation for the differences observed in the hypertrophy of the elbow flexors. 

Recruitment differences between fast and slow eccentric velocities cannot be excluded as a contributing factor; however, at present there is not enough evidence to support that this occurs. Nevertheless, the considerable difference in hypertrophy between fast eccentric and both fast and slow concentric training in the study of Farthing and Chilibeck lends support to the hypothesis that the force developed by the muscle during training is an important factor for hypertrophy.

At present, there are no accommodating resistance training studies that have investigated the impact of different eccentric velocities and/or different levels of torque development during eccentric muscle actions on the CSA of the human quadriceps as measured by scanning methods. 

There is also a lack of direct comparisons using accommodating concentric training at different velocities and/or different levels of torque development. The studies reviewed in this article suggest that hypertrophy can be induced with a range of concentric velocities. 

However, the largest increase (≈18% at mid-thigh level), as well as the by far highest rate of increase in quadriceps CSA (0.44% per day) for accommodating training, was noted in the study by Rafeei, who trained subjects with 5 sets of 10 concentric muscle actions at 90% of the maximum torque at 60 °/s, three times per week for 6 weeks.The subjects trained at the same absolute torque relatively high tensions. It is also possible that some fast fibers are preferentially recruited during eccentric actions and that this may occur at loads as low as 25% of MVIA.[158] Thus, it may be too simplistic to estimate the stress imposed on each muscle fibre merely by the magnitude of the external load. In summary, although there may well exist a high level of tension below which no hypertrophy occurs, the relationship between the training load and the hypertrophic response is complex. 

Achieving recruitment of the greatest possible number of motor units in the target muscle(s) and making these motor units fire at high rates and for sufficient lengths of time are obvious prerequisites for inducing significant hypertrophy. Moreover, it appears that maximal loads are not necessary to ensure that these conditions are met providing that the training is performed with close to maximum effort in at least one of the sets. The results support the typical recommendations with intensity levels of 70–85% of maximum when training for muscle hypertrophy, but also show that marked hypertrophy is possible at both higher and lower loads. However, placing high mechanical stress on the working muscle may result in local overtraining if the duration of work is long. 

Studies[83,84] have shown marked increases in CSA in response to loads as low as 20% of 1RM when the exercise has been combined with partial restriction of the blood flow by means of thigh torniquets. A study by Greenhaff and co-workers[157] showed a greatly increased rate of glycogenolysis in type-1 fibers and a marked decline in force and near total depletion of phosphocreatine in both fibre types during intermittent electrical stimulation of the quadriceps with the blood flow occluded. 

In terms of volume in strength training, a notable trend was the occurrence of a plateau in the hypertrophic adaptations after a certain point of volume or duration of work had been reached. In some of the results, there is even a suggestion of a decline when the volume or duration is extended beyond the point of the plateau. In the case of dynamic external resistance training of the elbow flexors, there's a suggestion of total repetitions producing a plateau.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area demonstrated gains in muscle thickness after as little as 1 set of 8-12 repetitions of specific exercise per muscle group. Due to a paucity of data, especially regarding the volume continuum (i.e. 1–20 total repetitions), there is a clear need for further research on the impact of training volume on whole muscle CSA.

This seems to equally apply to both previously untrained and well-trained individuals. Recent data provides further support to a dose-response relationship between the training volume and the hypertrophic response of the quadriceps. Increased quadriceps CSA was reported for a total of 6 sets (11.3%) versus 2 sets (7.6%) of quadriceps exercise at an exercise frequency of three times per week for 11 weeks.

Two studies demonstrated that high rates of growth can be achieved with a relatively small number of repetitions per session. In one study, very high loads were used for both the concentric and the eccentric phases and in the other study, extremely high loads were used for the eccentric phase. 

Another example shows significant hypertrophy can be induced with few muscle actions at very high loads, at least in previously untrained subjects.
 
The relationship between volume and the hypertrophic response may differ between different levels of torque and/or types and modes of strength training. The discrepancy between different studies in terms of the volume needed to induce hypertrophy may be related to differences in the total duration of muscle activity per session. In many studies, neither the velocity nor the duration of each repetition were reported.

Thus far, few studies have directly compared the effects of different volumes of work on the hypertrophic response measured by scanning methodology. Furthermore, it's difficult to compare studies where whole muscle scans were performed with MRI, CT or UL. 

In the scientific literature relating to the area of resistance training, it is commonly stated that 'eccentric training produces the greatest muscle hypertrophy'. This review reveals that all three types of muscle actions can induce significant hypertrophy at impressive rates. There is currently insufficient evidence for the superiority of any mode and/or type of muscle action over other modes and types of training in this regard. 

If anything, pure eccentric training is actually inferior to both concentric and concentric-eccentric training, as judged by the degree and rate of hypertrophy observed in the studies included in this review. If one instead considers concentric and eccentric training with accommodating resistance.Maximal eccentric training has been slightly more effective than maximal concentric training in the few studies that have directly compared these two types of training. However, the hypertrophic response has been modest in many of the studies comparing the effects of pure concentric versus pure eccentric training and this appears to be true both for accommodating resistance and dynamic external resistance training studies. Thus, the protocols that have been compared may not have been the best of each type. 

It is noteworthy that both the largest total increase in CSA (18.4%) and the highest rate of increase in CSA (0.44% per day) for the quadriceps for the category of accommodating training was noted for a pure concentric training group. This was also the second highest rate of increase for any mode of quadriceps training, surpassed only by the shorter study of Abe et al. The findings of Rafeei, of greater hypertrophy at the whole muscle level as well as at the muscle fiber level for near maximal concentric versus sub-maximal eccentric training, expanded on an almost identical study from the same research group, in which greater fibre hypertrophy was found for concentric training when compared with eccentric training when both regimens were performed at the same torque level.

The divergence in the results of concentric versus eccentric training between different modes (DER vs accommodating resistance) may be due to differences in the characteristics of the resistance for each mode. As discussed in the introduction, when using external resistance (e.g. free weights, weight machines), the torque is not necessarily optimally matched throughout the movement to the individual’s strength curve. Herzog et al. calculated that the internal forces of the three vastus muscles of the quadriceps are at their highest at knee angles of ≈60–80° of flexion (full extension is defined here as 0° of flexion), whereafter the forces drop to lower levels with decreasing angles of flexion. At 0–20° of flexion, the forces are low, only ≈20–40% of maximum. Similarly, Ichinose et al. reported that the force of the vastus lateralis was maximal at 70° of flexion.

Among the accommodating modes, the isoinertial flywheel knee-extension model of Tesch and colleagues has so far consistently induced hypertrophy of the quadriceps CSA at high rates (0.17–0.22% per day). It is not immediately obvious why this mode seems to be more effective than most of the isokinetic regimens that have also used maximal eccentric actions. In the flywheel study of Tesch et al., the subjects were instructed to resist only gently during the first part of the eccentric action and then apply maximum force. The torque-angle curves in the same study show that high eccentric forces were reached only during a rather short arc of ≈20–25°, from ≈65–90° of flexion. In contrast, during isokinetic eccentric exercise, maximum effort is usually applied from the start.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 247 collected at similar average velocities show that high actions can result in far greater peak loads than the nominal load. The significance, if any, of these eccentric forces can be achieved through an arc of at least 40°. However, maximum eccentric efforts at extended knee angles are often perceived as uncomfortable. In the isokinetic study of Seger et al., four of five subjects in the eccentric training group had frequent complaints of knee pain during the training, which may have affected the hypertrophic adaptations. Interestingly, Holder-Powell and Rutherford showed that much of the discomfort associated with maximum isokinetic eccentric exercise could be avoided if the subjects started to resist later in the arc of motion, from ≈45° of flexion instead of 15° of flexion. Also, the eccentric peak torque was significantly higher when the range of motion was 45–95°, compared with 15-95° of flexion. It could be that the relatively low volumes and short ranges of high-force eccentric exercise in the flywheel studies worked in favour of producing hypertrophy, whereas the isokinetic-eccentric protocols may have resulted in too much stress and strain on the tissues.

Other factors to consider when comparing the isokinetic and flywheel modes are the accelerations and decelerations that occur in the latter mode but by definition not in the former. It has been hypothesized that accelerative and decelerative forces are important components of the stimulus for muscle hypertrophy in resistance training. To date, there is little evidence to support this hypothesis. Collectively, the successes of both the dynamic, isokinetic and isometric modes in producing muscle hypertrophy does not appear to support accelerations and/or decelerations as being particularly important for the hypertrophic response. However, although the angular velocity in isokinetic training is controlled, the fascicle velocity in the working quadriceps varies markedly through the range of motion. Furthermore, isokinetics usually involve a brief build up of maximum recruitment of motor units are important factors in stimulating muscle hypertrophy, it makes sense to use generous rest periods between sets and repetitions of near-maximal to maximal efforts.

Because too many studies did not report the rest periods between sets (and repetitions), we opted not to try to evaluate any trends. However, some elaboration regarding the potential impact of rest periods is possible. Closely associated with rest periods is the role of fatigue in strength training. Regarding strength, some studies have shown that short rest periods between sets and/or repetitions are superior to longer ones, whereas other studies have concluded that longer periods are superior to shorter ones, while yet other studies have reported no difference. Upon closer examination, it appears that when maximal or near-maximal efforts are used, it is advantageous to use long periods of rest. This is logical in light of the well known detrimental effects of fatigue on force production and electrical activity in the working muscle. If high levels of force and maximum recruitment of motor units are important factors in stimulating muscle hypertrophy, it makes sense to use generous rest periods between sets and repetitions of near-maximal to maximal efforts. 

It is interesting that for the accommodating and isometric categories, the studies in which the highest speed before the isovelocity phase is reached and a short braking period after the isovelocity phase. Thus, from a muscle point-of-view, accelerations and decelerations occur even during ‘isokinetic’ exercise. It should also be noted that with weight-based resistance training, accelerations and decelerations occur. rates of muscle growth were found did include long rest periods. Furthermore, in the training study that reported the highest rate of CSA increase (0.26% per day), very long rest periods (10 minutes) between working sets were used, but in this study the volume was periodized, which may also have impacted on the results.

It is also worth noting that maximum isokinetic-concentric exercise performed with little rest between each muscle action is associated with a marked decline in peak torque during each working set, whereas little or no decline occurs during maximum eccentric exercise. Hence, it can be hypothesized that if the rest periods are too short during near-maximal concentric exercise, the training effects will be compromised.

Although eccentric exercise generally produces little acute fatigue, it appears that it is dependent on the training velocity (and probably also the work-to-rest ratio), with faster eccentric velocities producing less fatigue than slower velocities. The difference in acute fatigue development between concentric and eccentric muscle actions and also between fast and slow eccentric muscle actions have obvious implications for comparisons between these modes in regard to training effects. 

On the other hand, when using submaximal resistance, the size principle dictates that motor unit recruitment and firing rates are probably far from maximal until the muscle is near fatigue or unless the repetitions are performed with the intention to execute the movement very quickly.

The importance of exercising with near-maximal effort when using submaximal resistance in conventional strength training has been elegantly demonstrated by Goto and co-workers. In their study, two groups of untrained subjects performed 5 sets of 10 repetitions of dynamic knee extensions at a load of 10RM (≈75% of 1RM), two times per week for 12 weeks. One group performed all 10 repetitions in each set in a continuous manner to muscular failure, while the other group performed 5 repetitions and then rested for 30 seconds before performing the remaining 5 repetitions. Thus, although the volume was matched between the groups, the subjects of the latter group trained with considerably less effort in comparison to the first group. The results showed a dramatic difference in the extent of hypertrophy in favour of the group that trained in a continuous manner (12.9% increase in quadriceps CSA), versus the group that rested in the middle of each set (4.0% increase in quadriceps CSA). 

The authors speculated that both increased recruitment of motor units and a greater acute hormonal response could have contributed to the greater hypertrophy seen after the continuous protocol. However, along with the increased stress on the muscle with shorter rest periods at submaximal resistance, the potential for overtraining may also increase. In a study by Folland and colleagues, conventional resistance training with multiple sets to muscular failure and very short rest periods (30 seconds) led to considerable delayed onset muscle soreness during the first week of training. With this type of training, caution with the training frequency and volume appears to be warranted.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 249

4.6 Interactions Between Frequency,  of ≈1.17 between the increase in CSA and thickness is applied to the elbow flexors in the study of Far-thing and Chilibeck. One arrives at an estimated increase in CSA of ≈15% for the fast eccentric training group. 

The training groups of Farthing and Chilibeck progressed from 2 sets of 8 repetitions to 6 sets of 8 repetitions, resulting in an average total duration of muscle activity per session of 22 and 132 seconds for the fast and slow eccentric groups, respectively. 

In the study of Shepstone et al., the progression was from 1 set of 10 repetitions to 4 sets of 10 repetitions and the corresponding average total durations of muscle activity per session were 14 and 146 seconds for the fast and slow eccentric groups, respectively. 

We suggest that the slightly greater total duration for the fast group in Farthing and Chilibeck versus Shepstone et al. was responsible for the greater hypertrophic response in the former study. 

On the other hand, with the slow-velocity protocols, the cumulative damaging effects of the long durations of maximum eccentric exercise may have counteracted the hypertrophy so that this became less in comparison with the fast training.

 The study of Refsnes, using a dynamic constant resistance training model in which the eccentric phase was overloaded (progressing from 130% to ≈230% of 1RM during the time course of the study) also attests to the effectiveness of short durations of maximum eccentric exercise for inducing increases in elbow flexor CSA.

In this study, the volume was carefully progressed from 2 sets of 2 repetitions to 5 sets of 4 repetitions during the 8 weeks of the study, resulting in a maximum duration of ≈14–16 seconds of near-maximal eccentric work. 

The velocity in the eccentric phase was moderate, ≈80–90°/s. The concentric phase was loaded with only 30% of 1RM, and the contribution of the concentric phase to the hypertrophic response was therefore probably small. 

The subjects increased their elbow flexor CSA by 21.5% (0.38% per day), an impressive increase especially when considering the very brief duration of work. 

The risk for overtraining with long durations of high-force eccentric exercise is supported by a study. Because thickness measures only one dimension of the muscle, the increase in elbow flexor CSA was likely to be greater than 13%. If the muscle grew equally in width as it did in thickness, the result would be an increase in CSA of 27.7%. 

However, this scenario seems unlikely, because a triceps training study by Kawakami et al. showed that an increase of 31.7% in elbow extensor area was accompanied by an increase in thickness of 27.0%. If the same ratio is applied, the result would be a similar increase in CSA.Amiridis et al., compared different modes of training in a group of young elite female basketball players after a period of very strenuous training for the knee extensors. During the first 12 weeks, all subjects performed 8 sets of 8 concentric repetitions at 70% of 1RM and 8 sets of 8 eccentric repetitions at 110% of 1RM in the leg press, 4 sessions per week. At 12 weeks, the subjects had significantly reduced performances in both the leg press and the countermovement jump, indicating that they were overtrained. 

During the second 12 weeks of training, the subjects were divided into three groups that performed different modes of recovery training, 4 sessions per week. The first group trained with 8 sets of 8 concentric repetitions at 70% of 1RM; the second group completed 4 sets of 8 concentric repetitions at 70% of 1RM and 4 sets of 8 eccentric repetitions at 110% of 1RM; and the third group performed 8 sets of 8 eccentric repetitions at 110% of 1RM. 

Compared with values from the first 12 weeks overtraining, all groups increased their performance in the leg press and the countermovement jump, but only the pure concentric group noted significant increases in leg-press strength (39%), isokinetic strength (11–43%) and vertical jump(15%) in comparison with the pre-training values. Although no morphological data was presented in this study, it is likely that some degree of overtraining at the muscle level was responsible for the poor performance at 12 weeks. 

Despite reduced total volume in comparison with the first 12 weeks, neither the pure eccentric nor the combined concentric-eccentric groups experienced any supercompensation in performance, whereas the pure concentric group did. Thus, it would appear that moderate-force concentric training was better tolerated than high-force eccentric training, at least for the moderately high volumes and the rather high training frequency used in this study. The results of these studies support the common recommendation of using somewhat lower frequencies and volumes for high-force eccentric exercise than for conventional resistance training.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area. It's uncertain whether the mechanosensitivity of skeletal was similar between the groups. Needless to say, more research is needed regarding interactions between variables in both trained and untrained subjects. 

A comment on the interactions between strength and endurance training is warranted. It has been recommended that both strength and endurance training should be included in a well-rounded training programme. The additive effects of strength and endurance training on various parameters of health status have been shown in several studies. Recently, it has been demonstrated that while strength training by itself can lead to increased arterial stiffness, this negative effect can be offset if endurance training is performed concurrently. From a strength training point of view, there is an interest in how to train concurrently without affecting strength and hypertrophy negatively. It has been suggested that strength training should be performed first, in order not to compromise the quality of the strength-training session. 

However, this order may not necessarily be the best choice for inducing increases in muscle mass. Deakin investigated the impact of the order of exercise in combined strength and endurance training and reported that gene expression associated with muscle hypertrophy responded more strongly when cycling was performed before strength training, instead of vice versa. Interestingly, in the study of Sale et al., performing cycling first seemed to induce the greatest increase in muscle area. Still, because of the lack of studies investigating the effects of the order of exercise in concurrent training on hypertrophy, no firm conclusions can be drawn on this issue.

Time Course of Muscle Hypertrophy,
Strength gains as a result of a period of resistance training are usually attributed to two major factors: (i) neural adaptations; and (ii) hypertrophy. Until recently, the prevailing opinion has been that neural adaptations play the dominant role during the first 6–7 weeks of training, during which hypertrophy is usually minor. However, as noted by Staron and co-workers and by Sale, it appears that the hypertrophy starts earlier and becomes more dominant as training progresses.The hypertrophy process tends to begin early. Research shows that in the studies of Mayhew et al. and Rafeei, significant increases in muscle fibre were observed for the concentric training groups four weeks into the training. Further hypertrophy occurred at six weeks, which also manifested at the whole muscle level. Research also demonstrates that significant hypertrophy can occur early in the training process given the right frequency, intensity and volume of training. 

Based on the observation of positive muscle-protein balance after an isolated session of resistance exercise, Phillips has proposed that an increase in active force-producing myofibrillar proteins could occur after a single strength-training session. Willoughby and Taylor reported an increase in myofibrillar content in muscle biopsies obtained from previously untrained young men after just three strength-training sessions, with sessions separated by 48 hours of rest. 

In the study of Willoughby and Taylor, a conventional resistance-training model was employed; the myofibrillar content appeared to increase from the first workout, reaching significance after the second session. The hypertrophy process appears to be most rapid during the first 6 weeks, after which the rate declines slowly. 

Being responsive to the stimulus of strength training has been recognised as a characteristic of some muscles. More research into the time course of the hypertrophic process is needed, especially with reference to the effects of different regimens and modes.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 253

While others seem more stubborn, one explanation to this phenomenon could be that muscles frequently used in everyday activities are already in a trained state, thus leaving less room for improvements in strength and size. For example, the soleus muscle appears to be relatively unresponsive to resistance exercise in comparison with the vastus lateralis and the biceps brachii. Regarding the latter two muscles, it is commonly held that the elbow flexors are in a less-trained state than the quadriceps. Studies where the hypertrophic response of the quadriceps and the elbow flexors to similar training regimens have been directly compared tend to support this theory. The trends reported in this review for conventional resistance training for the quadriceps versus the elbow flexors lend support to this observation, as the Cross-Sectional Area (CSA) of the elbow flexors tended to increase at a greater rate (0.20% per day) than the quadriceps (0.11% per day).

Further support comes from a study by Turner and co-workers, who found marked hypertrophy in the elbow flexors (24% increase in CSA) in response to endurance training for the upper limb (arm cycling to exhaustion for 30 minutes, five times per week for 6 weeks), while leg cycling at the same relative intensity and duration had negligible effects on the mass of the lower limb. Notably, the rate of CSA hypertrophy for the elbow flexors observed in this study (0.57% per day) surpasses all strength-training studies included in this review, except that of Narici and Kayser.

The differences between various muscle groups in the physiological response to similar training regimens warrant some caution in generalising findings from one muscle group to another. Future investigations should study whether the dose-response relationships differ between the elbow flexors and the quadriceps in regard to the major training variables.

The Stimulus for Muscle Hypertrophy in Strength Training

It is beyond the scope of this article to discuss in any detail the pathways or networks of intracellular signals leading to hypertrophy as a result of a period of increased loading of the muscle(s) involved. Two studies by Martineau and Gardiner have provided insight into how different levels of force and different durations of tension may affect hypertrophic signaling in skeletal muscle. Using rat muscle preparations, these authors noted that mechanically sensitive pathways reacted in a dose-dependent manner to the level of force, so that larger increases in intracellular signaling were seen after eccentric actions when compared with isometric and concentric actions. In a follow-up study, they showed that the same pathways were also sensitive to the time-tension integral in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, this was the case regardless of whether the total duration was distributed into a few long durations of stretch or many short ones. Also, the rate of stretch had no effect on these pathways.

In the latter study, they remarked that both peak tension and time-tension integral must be included in the modelling of the mechanical stimulus response of skeletal muscle. Some of the pathways that are now recognised as crucial for the hypertrophic response were not assessed in the studies of Martineau and Gardiner, and little is currently known about the response of these pathways to the variables of peak tension and time-tension integral. One of these is the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase.Wernbom et al. found that protein kinase B/mammalian target of rapamycin (p70S6K) plays an impactful role in muscle adaptation. Physiological changes associated with exercise, such as temporarily increased Ca2+ levels in the cytosol, metabolite accumulation, ischaemia, and acute hormonal changes, may also act as signals for adaptation with interactions between these and mechanically-induced signaling deemed plausible. 

The potential role of acute hormonal responses in muscle adaptation has been reviewed extensively. Of note, apart from mechanical forces, growth factors and hormones, another exercise-related stimuli shown to impact hypertrophic signaling in skeletal muscle is heat stress. 

Interestingly, in both cultured muscle cells and in skeletal muscle, heat stress and mechanical stretch have been shown to interact so that protein expression and concentration is higher after a combination of the two stimuli than either alone. These authors posited that a stress-induced heat-shock response may modulate the exercise-induced adaptations of skeletal muscles, especially when combining vascular occlusion with resistance exercise. 

Based on the data, it is suggested that hypertrophic signalling in human skeletal muscle is very sensitive to the magnitude of tension developed in the muscle. It was observed that the increase in muscle size post short durations of maximal eccentric exercise, and somewhat longer durations of concentric, isometric and conventional dynamic resistance exercise can result in impressive increases in muscle volume. 

For future research, the authors encourage the isolation of the impact of each resistance training variable to explore the interactions between them, as well as reviewing the effects of various training strategies for maintaining and/or gaining muscle mass. 

Furthermore, they urge future researchers to provide more detailed descriptions of exercise protocols in their studies, variables such as speed, range and duration of each repetition and rest periods between repetitions and sets ought to be reported in addition to the standard practice.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 255

The commonly recognized variables of strength training involve frequency, intensity, volume and mode of exercise. EMS involves motor-unit firing patterns, are usually very different from those occurring in voluntary exercise, findings from such studies may not necessarily apply to voluntary strength training.

To date, most research concerning the effects of manipulating training variables have been carried out using DER training. Unfortunately, there are not many studies involving highly-trained individuals or studies extending for more than 8–12 weeks, hence the knowledge regarding the dynamics of the hypertrophy process past this point is limited. 

In short-term studies, large increases in the training loads for lower-body exercises such as squats, leg presses and knee extensions are often reported, sometimes on the order of 100–200%. As the gain in quadriceps muscle volume during the same time period rarely exceeds ≈15%, the stress per unit of muscle area should increase by almost as much as the increase in training weight. The impact of this increase in stress on the muscles and its interactions with the volume and frequency of training in terms of the hypertrophic response and the risk for overtraining needs further exploration. 

In humans, electromyostimulation (EMS) has been proven to result in increases in muscle volume comparable to those seen after voluntary strength training. Since EMS bypasses the CNS, the level of activation of a particular muscle group can be standardized. Combining EMS with isokinetic dynamometry could provide an opportunity to gain further insight into many of the issues discussed in this review, such as the effects of the level of torque, the type of muscle action (concentric vs isometric vs eccentric) and the total duration of activity. 

However, the effects of dose-response need to be addressed in the training of other muscle groups as well.

Table I. Recommendations for dynamic external resistance training for hypertrophy

Moderate load slow-speed training involves single and/or multiple joint exercise with a load of ≈50% of 1RM, 8–14 repetitions to muscular failure, 1–3 sets per exercise with a progression from 1 to 3–4 sets in total per muscle group. The velocity and duration per repetition is slow and rest between sets is 30–60 seconds. It is suitable for beginners and individuals who cannot tolerate high forces.

Conventional hypertrophy training utilizes single and/or multiple joint exercise and includes 8–10RM to muscular failure or near 4–6, with 1–3 sets per exercise. Progression is from 1–2 to 3–6 sets in total per muscle group. The velocity and duration per repetition are moderate with rest between sets being 60–180 seconds. It is suitable for novice to moderately trained individuals. Well trained athletes may need increased variation in intensity and volume.

Eccentric overload training includes single and/or multiple joint exercise, with an eccentric load of >105% of 1RM. Repetitions range from 4–6, with 1–5 sets per exercise. Progression is from 1–2 to 3–5 sets in total per muscle group. The velocity and duration per repetition is slow/moderate with rest between sets being 120–180 seconds. It is mainly suitable for advanced to elite athletes.Table II. Recommendations for accommodating training for hypertrophy

Moderately fast concentric (con) training overload
Mode: Isokinetic or hydraulic
Muscle actions: Con 
Exercise: Single and/or multiple joint
Effort: 90–100%
Repetitions: 10–15
Sets: 3–6 per exercise
Progression from 3 to 4–6 sets in total per muscle group
Velocity: 120–240°/s
Rest between repetitions and sets: 1–2 seconds, 60–120 seconds
Frequency: 3–5 sessions per muscle group/week

Slow concentric training
Mode: Isokinetic or hydraulic
Muscle actions: Con
Exercise: Single and/or multiple joint
Effort: 90%
Repetitions: 10
Sets: 3–5 per exercise
Progression from 3 to 5 sets in total per muscle group
Velocity: 45–60°/s
Rest between repetitions and sets: 5 seconds, 120 seconds
Frequency: 3 sessions per muscle group/week

Accommodating eccentric (ecc) training overload
Mode: Isokinetic or isoinertial flywheel
Muscle actions: Ecc and con (con is optional in isokinetics)
Exercise: Single and/or multiple joint
Effort: Ecc = up to 100% Con = up to 100%
Repetitions: 6–8
Sets: 1–5 per exercise
Progression from 1–2 to 4–5 sets in total per muscle group
Velocity: 45–60°/s
Rest between repetitions and sets: 0–5 seconds, 120 seconds
Frequency: 2 sessions per muscle group/week

We recognise that it is very difficult to separate the impact of each training variable from the effects of the other training variables. If one increases the training load in conventional weight training, it will also affect the volume of training, unless this is compensated for by increasing the number of sets performed. 

The main objective of many of the studies included in this review was not necessarily to maximise the hypertrophic response and the motivational level of the subjects may well have differed considerably between different studies. 

Closely associated with motivation is whether the training is performed under supervision or not. Direct supervision of the workout has been shown to result in superior increases in strength when compared with unsupervised training. The level of supervision during training varied among the studies included in this review.

The training status is also likely to have an impact on the hypertrophic response. A muscle that is already somewhat hypertrophied has less potential to hypertrophy further in relative terms than a previously untrained muscle. Conversely, a muscle that has atrophied because of disuse or detraining has a large growth potential and getting it back to its previous level will represent an increase in muscle volume.

The method of measuring muscle volume or CSA may influence the results. With earlier scanning techniques, the anatomical CSA of the muscle was measured without correcting for intramuscular fat. Recent methods of MRI and CT allow for measurements of interstitial fat, as well as muscle, and consequently for calculation of adipose tissue-free muscle. 

In young healthy subjects, the anatomical muscle area is only slightly larger than adipose tissue-free muscle area. Hence, any increase in muscle volume as a result of strength training will mainly reflect an increase in adipose tissue-free muscle mass. 

Therefore, the data from the studies included in this review were pooled irrespective of the muscle-scanning method used. However, because of the many confounding factors present when summarising and comparing the results of many different studies, the dose-response trends and recommendations may be potential limitations in our understanding.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 257

Recommendations for each training mode are given in tables situated throughout this review. These are based on the evidence outlined in this article as well as on training protocols that have shown to increase muscle mass. However, the tables should not be interpreted as stating that all modes and methods are equally effective in increasing muscle mass. Rather, the aim is to summarize different methods suitable for different situations and for specific populations. 

For example, fatiguing, low-to-moderate load, slow-speed resistance training has potential applications for the rehabilitation of patients for whom the high forces of conventional heavy-resistance exercise are contra-indicated. For patients who can tolerate relatively high forces, but for whom the metabolic and cardiovascular demands of traditional strength training are too severe, pure eccentric exercise may be an alternative because of the low energy demands of this type of exercise. 

It is essential that the trainer or therapist is aware of possible interactions between the training variables and how these interact with the exercise tolerance of the individual. For example, a training volume that is appropriate at a frequency of two sessions per muscle group per week may become excessive at three sessions per week. Conversely, a volume suitable at three sessions per week may be less than optimal at two sessions per week. 

The recommendations for isometric training for hypertrophy includes low-intensity isometric training suitable for individuals who cannot tolerate high forces and have restricted range of movement due to pain or injury. Another is high-intensity isometric training suitable for individuals who cannot tolerate near-maximal forces. Lastly, maximum-intensity isometric training should be used with caution to avoid excessive breath-holding and very high blood pressures.Whole-body workout versus single muscle-group trained subjects or for training studies extending for training also has a direct bearing on the appropriate dosage of training. If whole-body workouts are performed, the volume of specific work per muscle group may have to be reduced so that the overall volume does not become excessive. 

Conclusions:
This review demonstrates that several modes of training and all three types of muscle actions can induce hypertrophy at impressive rates and that, at present, there is insufficient evidence for the superiority of any mode and/or type of muscle action over other modes and types of training. That said, it appears that exercise with a maximal-eccentric component can induce increases in muscle mass with shorter durations of work than other modes. Some evidence suggests that the training frequency has a large impact on the rate of gain in muscle volume for shorter periods of training. Because longer studies using relatively high frequencies are lacking, it cannot be excluded that stagnation or even overtraining would occur in the long term. Regarding intensity, moderately heavy loads seem to elicit the greatest gains for most categories of training, although examples of very high rates were noted at both very low and very high intensities when the sets were performed with maximum effort or taken to muscular failure. Thus, achieving recruitment of the greatest number of muscle fibres possible and exposing them to the exercise stimulus may be as important as the training load per se. For the total volume or duration of activity, the results suggest a dose-response curve characterized by an increase in the rate of growth in the initial part of the curve, which is followed by the region of peak rate of increase, which in turn is followed by a plateau or even a decline. 

It is recognized that the conclusions drawn in this paper mainly concern relatively short-term training in previously untrained subjects and that in highly-trained subjects or for training studies extending for several months. The hypertrophic effects of different modes and types of strength training may be very different. The same may well be true for other populations, such as elderly and injured individuals.Strength Training and Muscle Cross-Sectional Area 259 ing methods. Weight training: a scientific approach. Minneapolis (MI): Bellweather press, 1987 Cellular approach. Five steps to increasing the effectiveness of your strength training program. Muscular adaptations in response to three different resistance-training regimens: specificity of repetition maximum training zones. Ultrasonographic assessment of human skeletal muscle size. 

Validity of ultrasonography muscle thickness measurements for estimating muscle volume of knee extensors in humans. A study on training effect on strength per unit cross-sectional area of muscle by means of ultrasonic measurement. Basic considerations for exercise. Designing resistance training programs. Clinical aspects of strength and power training. Comparative effectiveness of accommodating and weight resistance training modes. Generality versus specificity: a comparison of dynamic and isometric measures of strength and speed-strength. 

Muscle hypertrophy following 5-week resistance training using a non-gravity-dependent exercise system. A comparison of isoload and isoinertial leg press training on bone and muscle outcomes. The assessment of human dynamic muscular function: a comparison of isoinertial and isokinetic tests. Relationship between repetitions and selected percentages of one repetition maximum: a comparison between untrained and trained males and females. Skeletal muscle fiber type, resistance training, and strength-related performance. The accuracy of prediction equations for estimating 1-RM performance in the bench press, squat, and deadlift. 

Effect of voluntary vs artificial activation on the relationship of muscle torque to speed. Co-activation and tension-regulating phenomena during isokinetic knee extension. Eccentric and concentric torque-velocity relationships during arm flexion and extension: influence of strength level. Adaptation to chronic eccentric exercise in humans: the influence of contraction velocity. Selective activation of AMPK PGC-1alpha or PKB-TSC2-mTOR signaling can explain specific adaptive responses to endurance or resistance training-like electrical muscle stimulation. Performance and physiologic adaptations to resistance training. 

Muscle strength and cross-sectional area in man: a comparison of strength-trained and untrained subjects. Changes in force, cross-sectional area and neural activation during strength training and detraining of the human quadriceps. Human quadriceps cross-sectional area, torque and neural activation during 6 months strength training. A mechanism for increased contractile strength of human pennate muscle in response to strength training: changes in muscle architecture. Muscle hypertrophy, hormonal adaptations and strength development During strength training in strength-trained and untrained men. 

Short vs long rest period between the sets in hypertrophic resistance training: influence on muscle strength, size, and hormonal adaptations in trained men. Skeletal muscle hypertrophy and structure and function of skeletal muscle fibres in male body builders. Hypertrophic response to unilateral concentric isokinetic resistance training. Muscle quality: II. Effects of strength training in 65- to 75-yr-old men and women. MRI assessment of quadriceps muscle size before and after resistance training: determination of volume vs single-site CSA. A more efficient magnetic resonance imaging-based strategy for measuring quadriceps muscle volume.McCall GE, Byrnes WC, Dickinson A, et al. Muscle fiber hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and capillary density in college men after resistance training. J Appl Physiol 1996; 81: 2004-12 

H ¨akkinen K, Kallinen M, Izquierdo M, et al. Changes in agonist-antagonist EMG, muscle CSA, and force during strength training in middle-aged and older people. J Appl Physiol 1998; 84: 1341-9

Young A, Stokes M, Round JM, et al. The effect of high-resistance training on the strength and cross-sectional area of the human quadriceps. Eur J Clin Invest 1983; 13: 411-7

Jones DA, Rutherford OM. Human muscle strength training: the effects of three different regimes and the nature of the resultant changes. J Physiol 1987; 391: 1-11

H ¨akkinen K, Kallinen M, Komi PV, et al. Neuromuscular adaptations during short-term ‘normal’ and reduced training periods in strength athletes. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol 1991; 31: 35-42

Rutherford OM, Jones DA. Measurement of fibre pennation using ultrasound in the human quadriceps in vivo. Eur J Appl Physiol 1992; 65: 433-7

Sale DG, Martin JE, Moroz DE. Hypertrophy without increased isometric strength after weight training. Eur J Appl Physiol 1992; 64: 51-5

H ¨akkinen K, Pakarinen A, Kallinen M. Neuromuscular adaptations and serum hormones in women during short-term intensive strength training. Eur J Appl Physiol 1992; 64: 106-11

Ploutz LL, Tesch PA, Biro RL, et al. Effect of resistance training on muscle use during exercise. J Appl Physiol 1994; 76: 1675-81

H ¨akkinen K, Kallinen M. Distribution of strength training volume into one or two daily sessions and neuromuscular adaptations in female athletes. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol 1994; 34: 117-24

Smith RC, Rutherford OM. The role of metabolites in strength training: part I. A comparison of eccentric and concentric contractions. Eur J Appl Physiol 1995; 71: 332-6

H ¨akkinen K, H ¨akkinen A. Neuromuscular adaptations during intensive strength training in middle-aged and elderly males and females. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol 1995; 35: 137-47

H ¨akkinen K, Kallinen M, Linnamo V, et al. Neuromuscular adaptations during bilateral versus unilateral strength training in middle-aged and elderly men and women. Acta Physiol Scand 1996; 158: 77-88

Hisaeda H, Miyagawa K, Kuno S, et al. Influence of two different modes of resistance training in female subjects. Ergonomics 1996; 39: 842-52

Welle S, Totterman S, Thornton C. Effect of age on muscle hypertrophy induced by resistance training. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1996; 51: M270-5

McCarthy JP, Bamman MM, Yelle JM, et al. Resistance exercise training and the orthostatic response. Eur J Appl Physiol 1997; 76: 32-40

Housh DJ, Housh TJ, Weir JP, et al. Effects of unilateral concentric-only dynamic constant external resistance training on quadriceps femoris cross-sectional area. J Strength Cond Res 1998; 12: 185-91

Housh DJ, Housh TJ, Weir JP, et al. Effects of unilateral eccentric-only dynamic constant external resistance training on quadriceps femoris cross-sectional area. J Strength Cond Res 1998; 12: 192-8

H ¨akkinen K, Newton RU, Gordon SE, et al. Changes in muscle morphology, electromyographic activity, and force production characteristics during progressive strength training in young and older men. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1998; 53: B415-23
Effects of low-intensity resistance exercise with slow movement and tonic force generation on muscular function in young men. 
Effects of different duration isometric contractions on tendon elasticity in human quadriceps muscles. 
Effects of leucine and whey protein supplementation during 8 weeks of unilateral resistance training. 
Effects of low-load resistance training with vascular occlusion on the mechanical properties of muscle and tendon. 
Akt signalling through GSK-3{beta}, mTOR and foxo1 is involved in human skeletal muscle hypertrophy and atrophy.  
Hormonal adaptation determines the increase in muscle mass and strength during low-intensity strength training without relaxation.  
The influence of velocity-specific resistance training on the in vivo torque-velocity relationship and the cross-sectional area of quadriceps femoris.  
Influence of concentric resistance training on concentric and eccentric strength. 
Influence of concentric resistance training on eccentric peak torque and muscle cross-sectional area.  
Physiological adaptations to concurrent endurance training and low velocity resistance training.  
Adaptations to endurance training and low velocity resistance training performed in a sequence. 
Effect of high velocity resistance training on peak torque, cross sectional area and myofibrillar ATPase activity.  
Hypertrophy, resistance training, and the nature of skeletal muscle activation.  
Effects of concentric and eccentric training on muscle strength, cross-sectional area, and neural activation.  
Concentric isokinetic resistance training and quadriceps femoris cross-sectional area. 
Specific effects of eccentric and concentric training on muscle strength and morphology in humans.  
Early phase adaptations of muscle use and strength to isokinetic training. 
The effects of training at equal power levels using concentric and eccentric contractions on skeletal muscle fiber and whole muscle hypertrophy, muscle force and muscle activation in human subjects. 
Early skeletal muscle hypertrophy and architectural changes in response to high-intensity resistance training. 
Relative changes in maximal force, EMG, and muscle cross-sectional area after isometric training.Garhammer J, Takano B. Training for weightlifting. Tesch PA. Strength training and muscle hypertrophy. Ostrowski K, Wilson GJ, Weatherby R, et al. The effect of weight training volume on hormonal output and muscular size and function. McLester JR, Bishop P, Guilliams ME. Comparison of 1 day and 3 days per week of equal-volume resistance training in experienced subjects. Hawkins SA, Schroeder ET, Wiswell RA, et al. Eccentric muscle action increases site-specific osteogenic response. Hortobagyi T, Hill JP, Houmard JA, et al.

Dahl HA, Aaserud R, Jensen J. Muscle hypertrophy after light and heavy resistance training. Narici MV, Kayser B. Hypertrophic response of human skeletal muscle to strength training in hypoxia and normoxia. Moss BM, Refsnes PE, Abildgaard A, et al. Effects of maximal effort strength training with different loads on dynamic strength, cross-sectional area, load-power and load-velocity relationships.

Takarada Y, Takazawa H, Sato Y, et al. Effects of resistance exercise combined with moderate vascular occlusion on muscular function in humans. Okada J, Fukashiro S. Effects of resistance training associated with stretch-shortening cycle exercise on force development and muscle volume in human elbow flexors. Brandenburg JP, Docherty D. The effects of accentuated eccentric loading on strength, muscle hypertrophy and neural adaptations in trained individuals.

Walker KS, Kambadur R, Sharma M, et al. Resistance training alters plasma myostatin but not IGF-1 in healthy men. Hubal MJ, Gordish-Dressman H, Thompson PD, et al. Variability in muscle size and strength gain after unilateral resistance training. Vikne H, Refsnes PE, Ekmark M, et al. Muscular performance after concentric and eccentric exercise in trained men.

Shepstone TN, Tang JE, Dallaire S, et al. Short-term high- vs low-velocity isokinetic lengthening training results in greater hypertrophy of the elbow flexors in young men. Davies J, Parker DF, Rutherford OM, et al. Changes in strength and cross-sectional area of the elbow flexors as a result of isometric strength training. Chesley A, MacDougall JD, Tarnopolsky MA, et al. Changes in human muscle protein synthesis after resistance exercise.

Chesley A, MacDougall JD, Tarnopolsky MA, et al. The time course for elevated muscle protein synthesis following heavy resistance exercise. Phillips SM, Tipton KD, Aarsland A, et al. Mixed muscle protein synthesis and breakdown after resistance exercise in humans. Miller BF, Olesen JL, Hansen M, et al. Coordinated collagen and muscle protein synthesis in human patella tendon and quadriceps muscle after exercise.Muscular adaptation to concentric and eccentric exercise at equal power levels. Training-induced changes in muscle architecture and specific tension. Effects of the type of recovery training on the concentric strength of the knee extendors. Theoretical determination of force-length relations of intact human skeletal muscles using the cross-bridge model. Eccentric ergometry increases in locomotor muscle size and strength at low training intensities. Estimation of active force-length characteristics of human vastus lateralis muscle. The positive effects of negative work: increased muscle strength and decreased fall risk in a frail elderly population. Early application of negative work via eccentric ergometry following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. The role of training intensity in resistance exercise overtraining and overreaching. Reduction in range of movement can increase maximum voluntary eccentric forces for the human knee extensor muscles. Influence of concentric and eccentric muscle actions on acute strength patterns and adaptive responses to resistance training. In vivo estimation of contraction velocity of human vastus lateralis muscle during ‘isokinetic’ action. Fatigue contributes to the strength training stimulus. Training leading to repetition failure enhances bench press strength gains in elite junior athletes. The effects of rest interval length and training on quadriceps femoris muscle. Fatigue is not a necessary stimulus for strength gains during resistance training. Force and EMG signal patterns during repeated bouts of concentric or eccentric muscle actions. Different neuromuscular recruitment patterns during eccentric, concentric and isometric contractions. Number of contractions to maintain mass and force of a denervated rat muscle. Distribution of rest periods between electrically generated contractions in denervated muscles of rats. Electrical stimulation attenuates denervation and age-related atrophy in extensor digitorum longus muscles of old rats. Skeletal muscle adaptations during early phase of heavy-resistance training in men and women. Neural adaptations to strength training. Short-term training: when do repeated bouts of resistance exercise become training?199. Willoughby DS, Taylor L. Effects of sequential bouts of resistance exercise on androgen receptor expression. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2004; 36: 1499-506
216. Martineau LC, Gardiner PF. Insight into skeletal muscle mechanotransduction: MAPK activation is quantitatively related to tension. J Appl Physiol 2001; 91: 693-702
200. Foley JM, Jayaraman RC, Prior BM, et al. MR measurements of muscle damage and adaptation after eccentric exercise. J Appl Physiol 1999; 87: 2311-8
201. Willoughby DS, Taylor M, Taylor L. Glucocorticoid receptor and ubiquitin expression after repeated eccentric exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2003; 35: 2023-31
202. Trappe TA, Raue U, Tesch PA. Human soleus muscle protein synthesis following resistance exercise. Acta Physiol Scand 2004; 182: 189-96
203. Turner DL, Hoppeler H, Claassen H, et al. Effects of endurance training on oxidative capacity and structural composition of human arm and leg muscles. Acta Physiol Scand 1997; 161: 59-64
204. Abe T, DeHoyos DV, Pollock ML, et al. Time course for strength and muscle thickness changes following upper and lower body resistance training in men and women. Eur J Appl Physiol 2000; 81: 174-80
205. Rennie MJ, Wackerhage H, Spangenburg EE, et al. Control of the size of the human muscle mass. Annu Rev Physiol 2004; 66: 799-828
206. Glass DJ. Skeletal muscle hypertrophy and atrophy signaling pathways. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2005; 37: 1974-84
207. Nader GA. Molecular determinants of skeletal muscle mass: getting the ‘AKT’ together. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2005; 37: 1985-96
208. Hornberger TA, Esser KA. Mechanotransduction and the regulation of protein synthesis in skeletal muscle. Proc Nutr Soc 2004; 63: 331-5
209. Hameed M, Orell RW, Cobbold M, et al. Expression of IGF-I splice variants in young and old human skeletal muscle after high resistance exercise. J Physiol 2003; 547: 247-54
210. Hornberger TA, Chu WK, Mak YW, et al. The role of phospholipase D and phosphatidic acid in the mechanical activation of mTOR signaling in skeletal muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006; 103: 4741-6
211. Boppart MD, Burkin DJ, Kaufman SJ. Alpha7beta1-integrin regulates mechanotransduction and prevents skeletal muscle injury. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2006; 290: 1660-5
212. Spangenburg EE, McBride TA. Inhibition of stretch-activated channels during eccentric muscle contraction attenuates p70S6K activation. J Appl Physiol 2006; 100: 129-35
213. Lange S, Xiang F, Yakovenko A, et al. The kinase domain of titin controls muscle gene expression and protein turnover. Science 2005; 308 (5728): 1599-603
214. Goldberg AL, Etlinger JD, Goldspink DF, et al. Mechanism of work-induced hypertrophy of skeletal muscle. Med Sci Sports 1975; 7: 185-98
215. MacDougall J. Adaptability of muscle to strength training: a cellular approach. In: Saltin B, editor. Biochemistry of exercise VI. Champaign (IL): Human Kinetics, 1986: 501-13
